that he gave you, as you look back on it now, do you
think that was appropriate advice? It was
wonderful advice. I went up and went to work for the
highway department back up close to home in
Atlanta. The district office was located in
Atlanta and I worked for them from January through
May of the next year and transferred to the Bryan
district because they knew I was going back to
graduate school and it was a matter of
convenience. Two district engineers getting
together said let's move Walton to Bryan so you can
go to graduate school and they paid for it. And then
I worked for three months here in Bryan getting
ready to go to graduate school. And Saul Wright
told me I needed an attitude adjustment, and so I
went and got that two-year attitude adjustment
and changed direction a little bit. I was really
going to come back in materials in the soils area. I
had some profs in undergraduate school that had
really, I thought, turned me on to what I wanted to
do. I wanted in the general area of
transportation, but I thought I'd specialize in
soil. But I went to the highway department. I
really came back in more pure transportation
rather than materials. But in my time up at the
highway department, I was very well prepared. I
turned down a job offer with Exxon. Well, big
money. I think I went to work for the highway
department at $585 a month, and Exxon had offered
me $700 a month. Texaco had offered me $700 a month.
And so I was afraid, quite honestly, that had I
taken either of those jobs with the two oil
companies, I would have never come back. And I felt
like going to work for the highway department, I
would, in fact, come back, and I did. And to answer
the question, was I prepared? There's no question
I was prepared. Is there anything, looking back
now with the clarity of hindsight, is there
anything that you think A&M should have done more
of or could have done better?
Haskell, you know, yeah, when I consider my whole
career and the fact that not only was I an
undergraduate student here, but I went through a
master's and a Ph.D. program here. Well, I've seen
that, but primarily the undergraduate. Yeah, but
when I look at my career as a master's and a Ph.D.
student and as a professor and a dean here and the
things we did in those time periods, and I look back
as an undergraduate student, I can ask the
question, why did so many students not make it in
those days? And so could the university have done
something more in those days? Perhaps so. Perhaps
they could have done a better job of retention of
the student. But were we admitting? That's a good
question. No, no, there were a lot of them like old
Ned, you know, coming from small high schools and
preparation probably was not that good. And I
don't know if the expectations were that high
either, but I know the retention rate was not that
good in those days, and a lot of students did not
make it. So that's about the only thing I could say,
Haskell, as far as having good quality in the
classroom and good profs and what have you. I don't
look back on my undergraduate days at all and say,
boy, I had a bunch of lousy profs. Those guys were
great. I will never forget. To which ones would you
give the highest marks? I'm going to ask you the
negative. Who are the ones that you now think did
the best job? By name? Yeah. Oh, goodness. There
are 10 or 12 profs that were just absolutely
magnificent to me in my undergraduate days. And if
I limit it to my pure civil engineering program, it
has to be Neil Rowan, Wayne Dunlap, Ted Hirsch,
Howard Furr, all four rather demanding but just
exceptional teachers, exceptional teachers.
There were a large number of other profs that I
thoroughly enjoyed over in the supporting
departments and what have you. But I'd have to say
it was really in my department. I really didn't get
turned on until I got to my department, quite
honestly. And so those are the folks that I just
felt like did an absolutely stupendous job in
helping me and getting me prepared and knowing
what was right. And they went to bat for me for
graduate school. They were ready to see me in
graduate school. Yeah, Walt and Ken as a graduate
student at Texas A&M. So those are the guys that
really made a particular impact on me as an
undergraduate student. Other than the sheer
academics, what else did you learn at Texas A&M?
I really believe I learned teamwork. I really
believe I learned how to live with other people and
get along with other people and give and take and
share and compromise and do those things that you
have to do to live in a civilian society. I really
believe I learned those things. I learned a good
work ethic. There's no question that By the time
you got through an A&M preparation in
engineering, and I can't speak for the other
departments, but I think it's probably about the
same, but I really know that by the time I got out,
there was a work ethic there, that you worked for
what you got, and that if you did your work well,
there was a reward there for you. And those things
have not left me. I learned that at A&M, how to do
teamwork, how to work together.
If you were a consultant today to Texas A&M,
whether it be A&M in general and or engineering,
what advice would you give them about today and the
future for Texas A&M? I would try to give them some
help on how do we identify that youngster that we
want and that belongs here.
I hurt
more on one thing than anything else in my total A&M
experience, and that is knowing that today there
are literally thousands of kids out there that
want A&M so bad and they can't have it. And there's
not a solution to that, Haskell, as far as I know.
And I don't care what position I held out there. I
couldn't solve that problem and say, okay, if you
want to, you can have it. It's just not that way
anymore. But I would try to give some help to them in
identifying those students that will make it so
that we have extremely high retention, give those
kids the opportunity. I know when I went to the
dean's office, we did some... tracking of high
schools all across the state and we looked at SATs
and high school grades and high school rank and
extracurricular activities and all these sort of
things and said okay what kids are successful to us
and you know we'd see those kids with fourteen
hundred fifteen hundred SAT scores bust out and
not make it and you'd say well why and we'd try to go
back and look and see why and then we'd see this this
high school kid that uh... not necessarily a high
SAT score, that was doing extremely well in our
program. Why? And we tried to answer those
questions. I think that I, and maybe there exists
this already, I don't know. I'd put together a blue
ribbon committee and say, people, let's look what
it is out there that is the pool of Let's look at what
we're really trying to do as a state institution,
land grant institution, and all the other space
grants and sea grants and everything else that we
have. We do want to be the research institution as
well as the academic institution. What is it out
there for us that we really want to bring into our
institution I don't know why it's not still a hit
and miss to some extent. I may be wrong, but I think
maybe it is still a hit and miss to some extent. I
would try to really focus in on a real blue ribbon
panel that could address those issues and try to do
a better job of doing that. And quite honestly,
Haskell, if we did that, I think diversity would
take care of itself. I made a presentation a good
number of years ago right after the Oh, the
decision that... Hopwood. The Hopwood decision.
I had an opportunity to speak to one of the honor
societies at the university. And one of the
questions that came to me after the presentation
and question and answer period was, Dr. Walton,
what do you think is, what do you think the impact of
this decision is going to be? I said it only means
it's a difference of how we identify students. It
should be no more than that. We've just got to do a
different job of identifying those students that
we really need to bring to this campus. And the way
we've been doing it, someone says it's the wrong
way, so let's find a new way to do it. And Jim Yow, I
don't know if you remember Jim Yow. Jim was head of
the Civil Engineering Department at that time. We
had a discussion afterwards. He kind of agreed
with my basic premise there that, yes, we still can
be diverse. We can still bring in the students that
we want to bring in. We've just got to do a little bit
different job of how we identify them and how we
structure it. And again, I'm not too sure we've
done that yet.
What have we left out of your undergraduate days? I
think we pretty well covered the undergraduate
today. All right, then the last question is, what
feelings do you carry in your heart today for Texas
A&M?
You know, they're very strong. hard to define.
You want to give something back.
You want to
You still want to spend your last days as an Aggie,
you know? You want to go to your grave as an Aggie,
having never changed, no allegiance, nothing
changes. You want your last days still to be an
Aggie, and you want to share it, you know, with
everyone that you can. There's just that part of
belonging that... You've got to be one to know that
you are one. I really believe that. You've got to be
an Aggie to know what an Aggie is. I have very strong
religious convictions in high school. I have very
strong convictions about my family and
dedication to my family. My dad taught me to, son,
don't ever put anything before God. Your family
comes after that, but then don't put anything in
front of your family past that. And, man, I can pull
A&M real close behind that. You know, it's church
and family. Those Aggies come in a very strong
third, you know. It's just wonderful to be an
Aggie. Man, I wouldn't change anything. And I go
back and I look. I have 15 very close relatives that
are all A&M graduates and a daughter-in-law.
that's an Aggie, makes number 16, and my wife has
nine Aggies on her side, so we put my 16 and her nine
together, that's 25 Aggies that are pretty much in
the immediate family, and so we've got maroon
blood, and so we're not gonna be in danger of any of
us losing sight of what it means to be an Aggie, We
all share those strong convictions about what it
is. When I left here as an undergraduate, knowing I
was coming back to graduate school, I could hardly
wait to get back, quite honestly. It was hard for me
to consider jobs outside of the A&M system. When I
thought about getting a Ph.D. degree, Fred Bunsen
had arranged for me to go two or three different
places. I could have gone to Purdue. I could have
gone to the University of Texas. I could have gone
to Kansas State, his alma mater. And he said, why
leave the best? And he says, when you get on the
faculty here, he said, you're standing side by
side to another applicant that's moving up the
chain to tenure. He said, you just got to be a little
bit better than that graduate from somewhere
else. But he said, you'll get a shot at it. And he
said, I'm going to tell you what. He said, the Aggie
can be better every time. And I got a lot of
encouragement from Fred Benson to do that. And so
I've just got extremely deep feelings for A&M, not
only from my undergraduate days, you've got to
understand that it was more than undergraduate
days for me and my relationship with A&M. It's just
never-ending. That's great. I did skip one
question, so this is a note to the typist. Move this
one back before that last question. If you had the
capacity to make a major gift to Texas A&M,
somebody walks up to you and gives you a check for a
million dollars and you've got to pass it on, if you
could make a major contribution to Texas A&M, for
what purpose would you want that gift used? What
would be your favorite? Haskell, I am definite on
what I would do right now. My brother and I
established an endowed scholarship here. That's
behind us. It would definitely go to the Texas A&M
Press.
You're talking about the press as it's now named?
Yes. Really? There's no question. I'm in love with
the press. How marvelous. I have enjoyed so much. I
own a
copy of every book that the press has ever
published. There aren't many of us who do. I
believe that reading is very fundamental.
My little grandson is a very a very fine reader. I
have just, and his mother's a teacher, is the
reason that they encouraged it so much. But they
did such a wonderful job. And I just, it would go to
the Texas A&M Press. It would.